



HTTP                                                      M. Kleidl, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                               Transloadit
Intended status: Standards Track                           G. Zhang, Ed.
Expires: 21 July 2026                                         Apple Inc.
                                                          L. Pardue, Ed.
                                                              Cloudflare
                                                         17 January 2026


                       Resumable Uploads for HTTP
               draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-latest

Abstract

   HTTP data transfers can encounter interruption due to reasons such as
   canceled requests or dropped connections.  If the intended recipient
   can indicate how much of the data was received prior to interruption,
   a sender can resume data transfer at that point instead of attempting
   to transfer all of the data again.  HTTP range requests support this
   concept of resumable downloads from server to client.  This document
   describes a mechanism that supports resumable uploads from client to
   server using HTTP.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-
   upload/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the HTTP Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:ietf-http-wg@w3.org), which is archived at
   https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/ietf-http-wg/.  Working Group
   information can be found at https://httpwg.org/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/labels/resumable-upload.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 July 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Overview
     3.1.  Example 1: Complete upload of representation data with
           known size
     3.2.  Example 2: Upload as a series of parts
   4.  Upload Resource
     4.1.  State
       4.1.1.  Offset
       4.1.2.  Completeness
       4.1.3.  Length
       4.1.4.  Limits
     4.2.  Upload Creation
       4.2.1.  Client Behavior
       4.2.2.  Server Behavior
       4.2.3.  Examples
     4.3.  Offset Retrieval
       4.3.1.  Client Behavior
       4.3.2.  Server Behavior
       4.3.3.  Examples
     4.4.  Upload Append
       4.4.1.  Client Behavior
       4.4.2.  Server Behavior
       4.4.3.  Examples
     4.5.  Upload Cancellation
       4.5.1.  Client Behavior
       4.5.2.  Server Behavior
       4.5.3.  Example
     4.6.  Concurrency
   5.  Status Code 104 (Upload Resumption Supported)
   6.  Media Type application/partial-upload
   7.  Problem Types
     7.1.  Mismatching Offset
     7.2.  Completed Upload
     7.3.  Inconsistent Length
   8.  Content Codings
   9.  Transfer Codings
   10. Integrity Digests
     10.1.  Representation Digests
     10.2.  Content Digests
   11. Responses to Uploads
   12. Upload Strategies
     12.1.  Optimistic Upload Creation
       12.1.1.  Upgrading To Resumable Uploads
     12.2.  Careful Upload Creation
   13. Security Considerations
   14. IANA Considerations
     14.1.  HTTP Fields
     14.2.  HTTP Status Code
     14.3.  Media Type
     14.4.  HTTP Problem Types
   15. References
     15.1.  Normative References
     15.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  Changes
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-10
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-09
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-08
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-07
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-06
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-05
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-04
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-03
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-02
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-01
     Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-00
     Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-02
     Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-01
     Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-00
   Appendix B.  Draft Version Identification
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   HTTP data transfers can encounter interruption due to reasons such as
   canceled requests or dropped connections.  If the intended recipient
   can indicate how much of the data was received prior to interruption,
   a sender can resume data transfer at that point instead of attempting
   to transfer all of the data again.  HTTP range requests (see
   Section 14 of [HTTP]) support this concept of resumable data
   transfers for downloads from server to client.  While partial PUT is
   one method for uploading a partial representation (via Content-Range
   in the request), there are caveats that affect its deployability; see
   Section 14.5 of [HTTP].

   Canceled upload request can be triggered for various reasons,
   including but not limited to:

   explicit client cancellation:  e.g., terminating a user-agent process

   implicit client cancellation:  e.g., terminating a tab, garbage
      collecting a process or internal error

   explicit server cancellation:  e.g., scheduled maintenance

   implicit server cancellation:  e.g., DoS mitigation or internal error

   Connections can be dropped due to a variety of network or transport
   layer reasons triggered by endpoints or on-path elements.

   This specification defines a new mechanism for resumable uploads from
   client to server that can seamlessly fall back to conventional
   uploads.  When an upload is interrupted, clients can send subsequent
   requests to query the server state and use this information to send
   the remaining representation data.  Alternatively, they can cancel
   the upload entirely.  Unlike ranged downloads, this protocol does not
   support transferring an upload as multiple requests in parallel.

   Utilizing resumable uploads, applications can recover from unintended
   interruptions, but also interrupt an upload on purpose to later
   resume it, for example, when a user wants to pause an upload, the
   device's network connectivity changes, or bandwidth should be saved
   for higher priority tasks.

   The document introduces the concept of an upload resource to
   facilitate resumable uploads (Section 4) and defines new header
   fields to communicate the state of the upload (Section 4.1), the
   status code 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) to indicate the
   server's support for resumable uploads (Section 5), and the
   application/partial-upload media type to label partial representation
   data when resuming an upload (Section 6).

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Some examples in this document contain long lines that may be folded,
   as described in [RFC8792].

   The terms Structured Header, Item, Dictionary, String, Integer, and
   Boolean are imported from [STRUCTURED-FIELDS].

   The terms "representation", "representation data", "representation
   metadata", "content", "client" and "server" are from Section 3 of
   [HTTP].

   The term "URI" is used as defined in Section 4 of [HTTP].

   The term "patch document" is taken from [PATCH].

   An _upload resource_ is a temporary resource on the server that
   facilitates the resumable upload of one representation (Section 4).

3.  Overview

   Resumable uploads are supported in HTTP through use of a temporary
   resource, an _upload resource_ (Section 4), that is separate from the
   resource being uploaded to and specific to that upload.  By
   interacting with the upload resource, a client can retrieve the
   current offset of the upload (Section 4.3), append to the upload
   (Section 4.4), and cancel the upload (Section 4.5).

   The remainder of this section uses examples to illustrate different
   interactions with the upload resource.  HTTP message exchanges, and
   thereby resumable uploads, use representation data (see Section 8.1
   of [HTTP]).  This means that resumable uploads can be used with many
   forms of content, such as static files, in-memory buffers, data from
   streaming sources, or on-demand generated data.  Examples are purely
   illustrative and non-normative.  Implementations of this protocol are
   expected to follow normative requirements defined in other sections,
   together with applying security considerations presented in
   Section 13.

3.1.  Example 1: Complete upload of representation data with known size

   In this example, the client first attempts to upload representation
   data with a known size in a single HTTP request to the resource at
   /project/123/files.  An interruption occurs and the client then
   attempts to resume the upload using subsequent HTTP requests to the
   upload resource at /uploads/abc.

   1) The client notifies the server that it wants to begin an upload
   (Section 4.2).  The server reserves the required resources to accept
   the upload from the client and then sends an interim response to the
   client, which signals the server's support of resumable upload as
   well as the upload resource's URI via the Location header field
   (Section 10.2.2 of [HTTP]).  The client can start sending the
   representation data in the request content immediately after the
   request header.  Alternatively, it could also await the
   acknowledgement in form of the interim response.

   Client                                  Server
   |                                            |
   | POST /project/123/files                    |
   | Upload-Complete: ?1                        |
   |                                            |
   | [representation]                           |
   |------------------------------------------->|
   |                                            |
   |                                            | Reserve resources
   |                                            | for upload
   |                                            |-----------------.
   |                                            |                 |
   |                                            |<----------------'
   |                                            |
   |            104 Upload Resumption Supported |
   |            Location: /uploads/abc          |
   |<-------------------------------------------|
   |                                            |
   X--------------Flow Interrupted--------------X

                         Figure 1: Upload Creation

   2) If the connection to the server is interrupted, the client might
   want to resume the upload.  However, before this is possible the
   client needs to know the amount of representation data that the
   server received before the interruption.  It does so by retrieving
   the offset (Section 4.3) from the upload resource.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | HEAD /uploads/abc                               |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                204 No Content   |
   |                                Upload-Offset: X |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

                         Figure 2: Offset Retrieval

   3) The client can resume the upload by sending the remaining
   representation data to the upload resource (Section 4.4), appending
   to the already stored representation data in the upload using the
   application/partial-upload media type.  The Upload-Offset value is
   included to ensure that the client and server agree on the offset
   that the upload resumes from.  Once the remaining representation data
   is transferred, the server processes the entire representation and
   responds with whatever the initial request to /project/123/files
   would have produced if it had not been interrupted, e.g. a 200 (OK)
   response.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | PATCH /uploads/abc                              |
   | Upload-Complete: ?1                             |
   | Upload-Offset: X                                |
   | Content-Type: application/partial-upload        |
   |                                                 |
   | [representation from offset X]                  |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                          200 OK |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

                          Figure 3: Upload Append

   4) If the client is not interested in completing the upload, it can
   instruct the upload resource to delete the upload and free all
   related resources (Section 4.5).

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | DELETE /uploads/abc                             |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                  204 No Content |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

                       Figure 4: Upload Cancellation

3.2.  Example 2: Upload as a series of parts

   In some cases, clients might prefer to upload a representation as a
   series of parts sent serially across multiple HTTP messages.  One use
   case is to overcome server limits on HTTP message content size.
   Another use case is where the client does not know the final size of
   the representation data, such as when the data originates from a
   streaming source.

   This example shows how the client, communicating to a server known to
   support resumable upload, can upload parts of a representation
   incrementally.

   1) If the client is aware that the server supports resumable upload,
   it can start an upload with the Upload-Complete field value set to
   false and the first part of the representation.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | POST /project/123/files                         |
   | Upload-Complete: ?0                             |
   |                                                 |
   | [partial representation]                        |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                     201 Created |
   |                          Location: /uploads/abc |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

         Figure 5: Upload creation with partial representation data

   2) Next, intermediate parts are appended (Section 4.4) with the
   Upload-Complete field value set to false, indicating that they are
   not the last part of the representation data.  The offset value in
   the Upload-Offset header field is taken from the previous response
   when creating the upload or appending to it.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | PATCH /uploads/abc                              |
   | Upload-Complete: ?0                             |
   | Upload-Offset: X                                |
   | Content-Type: application/partial-upload        |
   |                                                 |
   | [partial representation from offset X]          |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                  204 No Content |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

         Figure 6: Appending partial representation data to upload

   3) If the connection was interrupted, the client might want to resume
   the upload, similar to the previous example (Section 3.1).  The
   client retrieves the offset (Section 4.3) to learn the amount of
   representation data received by the server and then continues
   appending the remaining parts to the upload as in the previous step.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | HEAD /uploads/abc                               |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                  204 No Content |
   |                                Upload-Offset: Y |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |
   | PATCH /uploads/abc                              |
   | Upload-Complete: ?0                             |
   | Upload-Offset: Y                                |
   | Content-Type: application/partial-upload        |
   |                                                 |
   | [partial representation from offset Y]          |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                  204 No Content |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

                  Figure 7: Resuming an interrupted upload

   4) The request to append the last part of the representation data has
   a Upload-Complete field value set to true to indicate the complete
   transfer.  Once the remaining representation data is transferred, the
   server processes the entire representation and responds with whatever
   the initial request to /project/123/files would have produced if it
   had received the entire representation, e.g. a 200 (OK) response.

   Client                                       Server
   |                                                 |
   | PATCH /uploads/abc                              |
   | Upload-Complete: ?1                             |
   | Upload-Offset: Z                                |
   | Content-Type: application/partial-upload        |
   |                                                 |
   | [remaining representation from offset Z]        |
   |------------------------------------------------>|
   |                                                 |
   |                                          200 OK |
   |<------------------------------------------------|
   |                                                 |

             Figure 8: Appending remaining representation data

4.  Upload Resource

   A resumable upload is enabled through interaction with an upload
   resource.  When a resumable upload begins, the server is asked to
   create an upload resource through a request to another resource
   (Section 4.2).  This upload resource is responsible for handling the
   upload of a representation.  Using the upload resource, the client
   can query the upload progress (Section 4.3), append representation
   data (Section 4.4), or cancel the upload (Section 4.5).

   An upload resource is specific to the upload of one representation.
   For uploading multiple representations, multiple upload resources
   have to be used.

   The server can clean up an upload resource and make it inaccessible
   immediately after the upload is complete.  However, if a client
   didn't receive the last response acknowledging the upload's
   completion and the upload resource is not available anymore, the
   client cannot verify the upload's state with the server.  Therefore,
   the server SHOULD keep the upload resource available for a reasonable
   amount of time after the upload is complete, or provide an alternate,
   application-specific way for the client to verify the completion of
   the upload.

   An upload resource SHOULD be unique.  Reuse of a URI for a different
   upload resource SHOULD be avoided in order to reduce the chance of
   misdirected or corrupted upload resources, as well as the potential
   security issues described in Section 13.

4.1.  State

   The state of an upload consists of the following properties that are
   tracked by the upload resource.

4.1.1.  Offset

   The offset is the number of bytes from the representation data that
   have been received, either during the creation of the upload resource
   (Section 4.2) and by appending to it (Section 4.4).  The offset can
   be retrieved from the upload resource (Section 4.3) and is required
   when appending representation data (Section 4.4) to synchronize the
   client and resource regarding the amount of transferred
   representation data.

   Representation data received by the upload resource cannot be removed
   again and, therefore, the offset MUST NOT decrease.  If the server
   loses any part of the state, it MUST deactivate the upload resource
   and reject further interaction with it.

   The Upload-Offset request and response header field conveys the
   offset.  Upload-Offset is an Item Structured Header Field
   ([STRUCTURED-FIELDS]).  Its value is a non-negative Integer
   (Section 3.3.1 of [STRUCTURED-FIELDS]) and indicates the current
   offset as viewed by the message sender.  Other values MUST cause the
   entire header field to be ignored.

   The Upload-Offset header field in responses serves as an
   acknowledgement of the received representation data and as a
   guarantee that no retransmission of it will be necessary.  Clients
   can use this guarantee to free resources associated to transferred
   representation data.

4.1.2.  Completeness

   An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by
   the client.  After this point, no representation data can be appended
   anymore.

   The Upload-Complete request and response header field conveys the
   completeness state.  Upload-Complete is an Item Structured Header
   Field ([STRUCTURED-FIELDS]).  Its value is a Boolean (Section 3.3.6
   of [STRUCTURED-FIELDS]) and indicates whether the upload is complete
   or not.  Other values MUST cause the entire header field to be
   ignored.

   An upload is marked as completed if a request for creating the upload
   resource (Section 4.2) or appending to it (Section 4.4) included the
   Upload-Complete header field with a true value and the request
   content was fully received.

4.1.3.  Length

   The length of an upload is the number of bytes of representation data
   that the client intends to upload.

   Even the client might not know the total length of the representation
   data when starting the transfer, for example, because the
   representation is taken from a streaming source.  However, a client
   SHOULD communicate the length to the upload resource as soon as it
   becomes known.  There are two different ways for the client to
   indicate and the upload resource to discover the length from requests
   for creating the upload resource (Section 4.2) or appending to it
   (Section 4.4):

   1.  If the request includes the Upload-Complete field value set to
       true and a valid Content-Length header field, the request content
       is the remaining representation data.  The length is then the sum
       of the current offset (Section 4.1.1) and the Content-Length
       header field value.

   2.  The request can include the Upload-Length header field defined
       below.

   The Upload-Length request and response header field is an Item
   Structured Header Field ([STRUCTURED-FIELDS]).  Its value is a non-
   negative Integer (Section 3.3.1 of [STRUCTURED-FIELDS]) and indicates
   the number of bytes of the entire representation data.  Other values
   MUST cause the entire header field to be ignored.

   If indicators (1) and (2) are both present in the same request, their
   indicated lengths MUST match.  If multiple requests include
   indicators, their indicated values MUST match.  A server can use the
   problem type [PROBLEM] of "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
   types#inconsistent-upload-length" (Section 7.3) in responses to
   indicate inconsistent length values.

   The Upload-Length field can be used in response to an offset
   retrieval; see Section 4.3.2.

   The upload resource might not know the length until the upload is
   complete.

   Note that the length and offset values do not determine whether an
   upload is complete.  Instead, the client uses the Upload-Complete
   (Section 4.1.2) header field to indicate that a request completes the
   upload.  The offset could match the length, but the upload can still
   be incomplete.

4.1.4.  Limits

   An upload resource MAY enforce one or multiple limits, which are
   communicated to the client via the Upload-Limit response header
   field.  Upload-Limit is a Dictionary Structured Header Field
   ([STRUCTURED-FIELDS]).  Its value is a Dictionary (Section 3.2 of
   [STRUCTURED-FIELDS]).  Other values MUST cause the entire header
   field to be ignored.

   The following key-value pairs are defined:

   max-size:  Specifies a maximum size for the representation data,
      counted in bytes.  The server might not create an upload resource
      if the length (Section 4.1.3) deduced from the upload creation
      request is larger than the maximum size.  The server might also
      deactivate the upload resource if the offset (Section 4.1.1)
      exceeds the maximum size.  The value is an Integer.

   min-size:  Specifies a minimum size for the representation data,
      counted in bytes.  The server might not create an upload resource
      if the length (Section 4.1.3) deduced from the upload creation
      request is smaller than the minimum size or no length can be
      deduced at all.  The value is an Integer.

   max-append-size:  Specifies a maximum size counted in bytes for the
      request content in a single upload append request (Section 4.4).
      The server might reject requests exceeding this limit.  A client
      that is aware of this limit MUST NOT send larger upload append
      requests.  The value is an Integer.

   min-append-size:  Specifies a minimum size counted in bytes for the
      request content in a single upload append request (Section 4.4).
      The server might reject requests below this limit.  A client that
      is aware of this limit MUST NOT send smaller upload append
      requests.  The value is an Integer.  Requests completing the
      upload by including the Upload-Complete: ?1 header field are
      exempt from this limit.

   max-age:  Specifies the remaining lifetime of the upload resource in
      seconds counted from the generation of the response.  After the
      resource's lifetime is reached, the server might make the upload
      resource inaccessible and a client SHOULD NOT attempt to access
      the upload resource as these requests will likely fail.  The value
      is an Integer.

   Clients usually discover limits through the Upload-Limit header field
   when the upload resource is created (Section 4.2).  Throughout the
   lifetime of the upload resource, these limits SHOULD NOT change in a
   way that causes failures for clients adhering to the initially
   discovered limits.  In particular, whereas the values for max-size,
   max-append-size, and max-age can increase without harm, they SHOULD
   NOT decrease as they can cause ongoing uploads to fail.  Similarly,
   the value for min-append-size SHOULD NOT increase.  If the client
   discovers that it cannot continue the upload while adhering to the
   limits, it SHOULD stop the current request immediately and cancel the
   upload (Section 4.5).

   Receivers of Upload-Limit parse the Dictionary as described in
   Section 4.2 of [STRUCTURED-FIELDS].  Where the Dictionary is
   successfully parsed, this document places two additional requirements
   on Dictionary members.  First, a member with an unknown key MUST be
   ignored.  Second, a member with a known key but a value of unexpected
   type MUST cause the entire Upload-Limit header field to be ignored,
   or alternatively the complete HTTP message MUST be treated as
   malformed.

   A server that supports the creation of a resumable upload resource
   (Section 4.2) for a target URI MUST include the Accept-Patch
   (Section 3.1 of [PATCH]) header field in response to an OPTIONS
   request for the target URI.  If a server supports the creation of
   upload resources for any target URI, it SHOULD include the Accept-
   Patch header field in response to an OPTIONS request for the target *
   (if this target is supported).  The value of the Accept-Patch header
   field MUST include the full application/partial-upload media type,
   even if it already contains */* or application/*. The Upload-Limit
   header field SHOULD be included in the response to an OPTIONS request
   if limits apply.

   A client can use an OPTIONS request to discover support for resumable
   uploads and potential limits before creating an upload resource.
   While the values */* and application/* in the Accept-Patch response
   header field indicate the acceptance of the application/partial-
   upload in PATCH requests, it does not necessarily indicate support
   for all aspects of resumable uploads as defined in this document.  To
   reduce the likelihood of failing requests, the limits announced in an
   OPTIONS response SHOULD NOT be less restrictive than the limits
   applied to an upload once the upload resource has been created,
   unless the request to create an upload resource included additional
   information that warrants different limits.  For example, a server
   might announce a general maximum size limit of 1GB, but reduce it to
   100MB when the media type indicates an image.

   Servers, including intermediaries, can (and often do) apply
   restrictions on the size of individual request message content.
   There is no standard mechanism to communicate such existing size
   restriction.  A server that implements one can respond with a 413
   Content Too Large status code; see Section 15.5.14 of [HTTP].
   Appending to an upload resource, as a series of appends, can be used
   to upload data up to the max-size limit without encountering per-
   message limits.  The min-append-size and max-append-size limits apply
   to the upload resource.  Servers might apply restrictions that are
   smaller than the append limits, which would also result in a failed
   request.  Clients could deal with such situations by retrying an
   upload append using a smaller size, as long as the new size resides
   between min-append-size and max-append-size.  Cases where an append
   uses min-append-size yet fails with a 413 Content Too Large response
   might indicate a deployment mismatch that cannot be recovered from.

4.2.  Upload Creation

4.2.1.  Client Behavior

   A client can start a resumable upload from any request that can carry
   content by including the Upload-Complete header field
   (Section 4.1.2).  As a consequence, all request methods that allow
   content are possible, such as POST, PUT, and PATCH.

   The Upload-Complete header field is set to true if the request
   content includes the entire representation data that the client
   intends to upload.  This is also a requirement for transparently
   upgrading to resumable uploads from traditional uploads
   (Section 12.1.1).

   If the client knows the representation data's length, it SHOULD
   indicate the length in the request to help the server allocate
   necessary resources for the upload and provide early feedback if the
   representation violates a limit (Section 4.1.4).  This indication can
   be done through the Upload-Length header field or the combination of
   the Content-Length and Upload-Complete: ?1 header fields (see
   Section 4.1.3).

   The client SHOULD respect any limits (Section 4.1.4) announced in the
   Upload-Limit header field in interim or final responses.  In
   particular, if the allowed maximum size is less than the amount of
   representation data the client intends to upload, the client SHOULD
   stop the current request immediately and cancel the upload
   (Section 4.5).

   The request content can be empty.  If the Upload-Complete header
   field is then set to true, the client intends to upload an empty
   representation.  An Upload-Complete header field set to false is also
   valid.  This can be used to retrieve the upload resource's URI before
   transferring any representation data.  Since interim responses are
   optional, this technique provides another mechanism to learn the URI,
   at the cost of an additional round-trip before data upload can
   commence.

   Representation metadata included in the initial request (see
   Section 8.3 of [HTTP]) can affect how servers act on the uploaded
   representation data.  The Content-Type header field (Section 8.3 of
   [HTTP]) indicates the media type of the representation.  The Content-
   Disposition header field ([CONTENT-DISPOSITION]) can be used to
   transmit a filename.  The Content-Encoding header field (Section 8.4
   of [HTTP]) names the content codings applied to the representation.

   If the client received a final response with a

   *  2xx (Successful) status code and the entire representation data
      was transferred in the request content, the upload is complete and
      the response comes from the targeted resource processing the
      representation.

   *  2xx (Successful) status code and the entire representation data
      was not transferred in the request content, the Location response
      header field points the client to the created upload resource.
      The client can continue appending representation data to it
      (Section 4.4).

   *  4xx (Client Error) status code, the client SHOULD NOT attempt to
      retry or resume the upload, unless the semantics of the response
      allow or recommend the client to retry the request.

   *  5xx (Server Error) status code or no final response at all due to
      connectivity issues, the client MAY automatically attempt upload
      resumption by retrieving the current offset (Section 4.3) if it
      received the URI of the upload resource in a 104 (Upload
      Resumption Supported) interim response.

4.2.2.  Server Behavior

   Upon receiving a request with the Upload-Complete header field, the
   server can choose to offer resumption support by creating an upload
   resource.  If so, it SHOULD announce the upload resource by sending
   an interim response with the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status
   code unless the server is not capable of sending interim responses.
   The interim response allows the client to resume the upload even if
   the message exchange gets later interrupted.  When sent, it MUST
   include Location header field pointing to the upload resource and
   MUST include the Upload-Limit header field with the corresponding
   limits (Section 4.1.4) if existing.

   The resource targeted by this initial request is responsible for
   processing the representation data transferred in the resumable
   upload according to the method and header fields in the initial
   request, while the upload resource enables resuming the transfer.

   If the Upload-Complete request header field is set to true, the
   client intends to transfer the entire representation data in one
   request.  If the request content was fully received, no resumable
   upload is needed and the resource proceeds to process the request and
   generate a response.

   If the Upload-Complete header field is set to false, the client
   intends to transfer the representation over multiple requests.  If
   the request content was fully received, the server MUST include the
   Location response header field pointing to the upload resource and
   MUST include the Upload-Limit header field with the corresponding
   limits if existing.  Servers are RECOMMENDED to use the 201 (Created)
   status code.

   The server MUST record the length according to Section 4.1.3 if the
   Upload-Length or Upload-Complete: ?1 header fields are included in
   the request.

   While the request content is being received, the server MAY send
   multiple interim responses with a 104 (Upload Resumption Supported)
   status code and the Upload-Offset header field set to the current
   offset to inform the client about the upload progress.

   Where a response requires a Location header field to be included, all
   interim and final response messages for the same request MUST contain
   an identical Location value.  However, final responses including the
   Upload-Complete: ?1 header field are exempt from this requirement
   because they are the result of processing the transferred
   representation and the Location value does not necessarily represent
   the upload location.  Where the Location value is expected to be
   identical across multiple messages, clients SHOULD verify this.  If
   verification fails, clients SHOULD abort the current request and
   cancel the upload (Section 4.5).

   The server might not receive the entire request content when the
   upload is interrupted, for example because of dropped connection or
   canceled request.  In this case, the server SHOULD append as much of
   the request content as possible to the upload resource, allowing the
   client to resume the upload from where it was interrupted.  In
   addition, the upload resource MUST NOT be considered complete then.

4.2.3.  Examples

   A) The following example shows an upload creation, where the entire
   123456789 bytes are transferred in the initial request.  The server
   sends multiple interim responses and one final response from
   processing the uploaded representation.

   POST /project/123/files HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Content-Length: 123456789
   Upload-Length: 123456789

   [content (123456789 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 104 Upload Resumption Supported
   Location: https://example.com/upload/b530ce8ff
   Upload-Limit: max-size=1234567890

   HTTP/1.1 104 Upload Resumption Supported
   Upload-Offset: 23456789

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Location: https://example.com/upload/b530ce8ff
   Upload-Limit: max-size=1234567890
   Content-Type: application/json

   {"attachmentId": "b530ce8ff"}

   B) The following example shows an upload creation, where only the
   first 23456789 bytes of a 123456789 bytes upload are transferred.
   The server acknowledges the received representation data and that the
   upload is not complete yet.  The client can continue appending data.

   POST /upload HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?0
   Content-Length: 23456789
   Upload-Length: 123456789

   [partial content (23456789 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 104 Upload Resumption Supported
   Location: https://example.com/upload/3fd4994ad

   HTTP/1.1 201 Created
   Location: https://example.com/upload/3fd4994ad
   Upload-Limit: max-size=1234567890

   C) The following example shows an upload creation, where the server
   responds with a 5xx status code.  Thanks to the interim response
   containing the upload resource URI, the client can resume the upload.

   POST /upload HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Content-Length: 123456789
   Upload-Length: 123456789

   [content (123456789 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 104 Upload Resumption Supported
   Location: https://example.com/upload/0587fa44b

   HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Error

   D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by
   the server because uploads to the target resource are not allowed.
   The client cannot continue the upload.

   POST /upload-not-allowed HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Content-Length: 123456789
   Upload-Length: 123456789

   [content (123456789 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 405 Method Not Allowed

4.3.  Offset Retrieval

4.3.1.  Client Behavior

   If the client wants to resume the upload after an interruption, it
   has to know the amount of representation data received by the upload
   resource so far.  It can fetch the offset by sending a HEAD request
   to the upload resource.  Upon a successful response, the client can
   continue the upload by appending representation data (Section 4.4)
   starting at the offset indicated by the Upload-Offset response header
   field.

   The offset can be less than or equal to the number of bytes of
   representation data that the client has already sent.  The client MAY
   reject an offset which is greater than the number of bytes it has
   already sent during this upload by not continuing the upload and
   canceling the upload resource (Section 4.5).  The client is expected
   to handle backtracking of a reasonable length.  If the offset is
   invalid for this upload, or if the client cannot backtrack to the
   offset and reproduce the same representation data it has already
   sent, the upload MUST be considered a failure.  The client then MUST
   NOT continue the upload and SHOULD cancel the upload (Section 4.5).

   The client MUST NOT perform offset retrieval while creation
   (Section 4.2) or appending (Section 4.4) is in progress as this can
   cause the previous request to be terminated by the server as
   described in Section 4.6.

   If the client received a response with a

   *  2xx (Successful) status code, the client can continue appending
      representation data to it (Section 4.4) if the upload is not
      complete yet.

   *  307 (Temporary Redirect) or 308 (Permanent Redirect) status code,
      the client MAY retry retrieving the offset from the new URI.

   *  4xx (Client Error) status code, the client SHOULD NOT attempt to
      retry or resume the upload, unless the semantics of the response
      allow or recommend the client to retry the request.

   *  5xx (Server Error) status code or no final response at all due to
      connectivity issues, the client MAY retry retrieving the offset.

4.3.2.  Server Behavior

   A successful response to a HEAD request against an upload resource

   *  MUST include the offset in the Upload-Offset header field
      (Section 4.1.1),

   *  MUST include the completeness state in the Upload-Complete header
      field (Section 4.1.2),

   *  MUST include the length in the Upload-Length header field, unless
      the client has not supplied one, by providing the corresponding
      headers as described in (Section 4.1.3),

   *  MUST indicate the limits in the Upload-Limit header field
      (Section 4.1.4), and

   *  SHOULD include the Cache-Control header field with the value no-
      store to prevent HTTP caching ([CACHING]).

   The resource SHOULD NOT generate a response with the 301 (Moved
   Permanently) and 302 (Found) status codes because clients might
   follow the redirect without preserving the HEAD method.

4.3.3.  Examples

   A) The following example shows an offset retrieval request.  The
   server indicates the current offset and that the upload is not
   complete yet.  The client can continue to append representation data.

   HEAD /upload/c35e2cd29 HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com

   HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
   Upload-Complete: ?0
   Upload-Offset: 25000000
   Upload-Length: 100000000
   Upload-Limit: max-age=3600
   Cache-Control: no-store

   B) The following example shows an offset retrieval request for a
   completed upload.  The client does not need to continue the upload.

   HEAD /upload/a9edb781b HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com

   HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Upload-Offset: 100000000
   Upload-Length: 100000000
   Cache-Control: no-store

4.4.  Upload Append

4.4.1.  Client Behavior

   A client can continue the upload and append representation data by
   sending a PATCH request with the application/partial-upload media
   type (Section 6) to the upload resource.  The request content is the
   representation data to append.

   The client MUST indicate the offset of the request content inside the
   representation data by including the Upload-Offset request header
   field.  To ensure that the upload resource will accept the request,
   the offset SHOULD be taken from an immediate previous response for
   retrieving the offset (Section 4.3) or appending representation data
   (Section 4.4).

   The request MUST include the Upload-Complete header field.  Its value
   is true in two cases:

   *  the request has content that is the end of the representation
      data.  Once the content is fully received by the server, the
      upload is complete.

   *  the request has no content.  Once the request is processed by the
      server, the upload is complete.  This usage requires the full
      representation data to have been received via prior requests.

   If the client received a final response with the Upload-Complete: ?1
   header field, the upload is complete and the corresponding response
   comes from the resource processing the representation according to
   the initial request (see Section 4.2).  Note that the status code
   does not necessary indicate success. 4xx (Client Error) or 5xx
   (Server Error) status codes indicate in this case that the
   representation was fully transmitted, but an error occurred while
   processing it.  Resuming the upload would not resolve this error.

   If the client received a final response with the Upload-Complete: ?0
   header field or the header field missing, the next step depends on
   the status code:

   *  A 2xx (Successful) status code indicates that representation data
      was appended but the upload is not complete.  The client can
      continue appending representation data.

   *  For a 307 (Temporary Redirect) or 308 (Permanent Redirect) status
      code, the client MAY retry appending to the new URI.

   *  For a 4xx (Client Error) status code, the client SHOULD NOT
      attempt to retry or resume the upload, unless the semantics of the
      response allow or recommend the client to retry the request.

   *  For a 5xx (Server Error) status code, the client MAY automatically
      attempt upload resumption by retrieving the current offset
      (Section 4.3).

   If no final response was received at all due to connectivity issues,
   the client MAY automatically attempt upload resumption by retrieving
   the current offset (Section 4.3).

4.4.2.  Server Behavior

   An upload resource applies a PATCH request with the application/
   partial-upload media type (Section 6) by appending the patch document
   in the request content to the upload resource.

   The server might not receive the entire patch document when the
   upload is interrupted, for example because of a dropped connection or
   canceled request.  In this case, the server SHOULD append as much of
   the patch document as possible to the upload resource, starting at
   its beginning and without discontinuities.  Appending a continuous
   section starting at the patch document's beginning constitutes a
   successful PATCH as defined in Section 2 of [PATCH].  Saving the
   received data allows the client to resume the upload from where it
   was interrupted.  In addition, the upload resource MUST NOT be
   considered complete then.

   If the Upload-Offset request header field value does not match the
   current offset (Section 4.1.1), the upload resource MUST reject the
   request with a 409 (Conflict) status code.  The response MUST include
   the correct offset in the Upload-Offset header field.  The response
   can use the problem type [PROBLEM] of "https://iana.org/assignments/
   http-problem-types#mismatching-upload-offset" (Section 7.1).

   If the upload is already complete (Section 4.1.2), the server MUST
   NOT modify the upload resource and MUST reject the request.  The
   choice of response depends on the nature of the upload request and
   server state, including but not limited to:

   *  If the client attempted to append a non-zero length document, the
      server MUST treat this as an inconsistent length failure.  The
      server can use the problem type [PROBLEM] of
      "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#inconsistent-
      upload-length" (Section 7.3) in the response.

   *  If the client attempted to append a zero-length document:

      -  If the server retains knowledge of the upload resource but it
         is not available, the 410 (Gone) status code can be used; the
         response could also contain a Location header field to indicate
         the location of the completed upload.  The server can use the
         problem type [PROBLEM] of "https://iana.org/assignments/http-
         problem-types#completed-upload" (Section 7.2) in the response.

      -  If the server has not retained knowledge of the upload
         resource, a 404 (Not Found) status code can be used.

   If the Upload-Complete request header field is set to true, the
   client intends to transfer the remaining representation data in one
   request.  If the request content was fully received, the upload is
   marked as complete and the upload resource SHOULD generate the
   response that matches what the resource, that was targeted by the
   initial upload creation (Section 4.2), would have generated if it had
   received the entire representation in the initial request.  However,
   the response MUST include the Upload-Complete header field with a
   true value, allowing clients to identify whether a response, in
   particular error responses, is related to the resumable upload itself
   or the processing of the upload representation.

   If the Upload-Complete request header field is set to false, the
   client intends to transfer the remaining representation over multiple
   requests.  If the request content was fully received, the upload
   resource acknowledges the appended data by sending a 2xx (Successful)
   response with the Upload-Complete header field set to false.

   The server MUST record the length according to Section 4.1.3 if the
   Upload-Length or Upload-Complete header fields are included in the
   request.  If the length is known, the server MUST prevent the offset
   from exceeding the upload length by rejecting the request once the
   offset exceeds the length, marking the upload resource invalid and
   rejecting any further interaction with it.  It is not sufficient to
   rely on the Content-Length header field for enforcement because the
   header field might not be present.

   While the request content is being received, the server SHOULD send
   interim responses with a 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status
   code and the Upload-Offset header field set to the current offset to
   inform the client about the upload progress.  These interim responses
   MUST NOT include the Location header field.

4.4.3.  Examples

   A) The following example shows an upload append request.  The client
   transfers the next 23456789 bytes at an offset of 23456789 and does
   not indicate that the upload is then completed.  The server generates
   one interim response and finally acknowledges the new offset:

   PATCH /upload/37a504d87 HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?0
   Upload-Offset: 23456789
   Content-Length: 23456789
   Content-Type: application/partial-upload

   [content (23456789 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 104 Upload Resumption Supported
   Upload-Offset: 35185184

   HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
   Upload-Complete: ?0

   B) The next example shows an upload append, where the client
   transfers the remaining 4567890 bytes and completes the upload with a
   length of 1234567890 bytes.  The server processes the uploaded
   representation and generates the responding response, in this example
   containing extracted meta data:

   PATCH /upload/d38d6ffe8 HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Upload-Offset: 1230000000
   Content-Length: 4567890
   Content-Type: application/partial-upload

   [content (4567890 bytes)]

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Upload-Complete: ?1
   Content-Type: application/json

   {
     "metadata": {
       [...]
     }
   }

4.5.  Upload Cancellation

4.5.1.  Client Behavior

   If the client wants to terminate the transfer without the ability to
   resume, it can send a DELETE request to the upload resource.  Doing
   so is an indication that the client is no longer interested in
   continuing the upload, and that the server can release any resources
   associated with it.

4.5.2.  Server Behavior

   Upon receiving a DELETE request, the server SHOULD deactivate the
   upload resource.

   The server SHOULD terminate any in-flight requests to the upload
   resource before sending the response by abruptly terminating their
   HTTP connection(s) or stream(s) as described in Section 4.6.

   The resource SHOULD NOT generate a response with the 301 (Moved
   Permanently) and 302 (Found) status codes because clients might
   follow the redirect without preserving the DELETE method.

4.5.3.  Example

   The following example shows an upload cancellation:

   DELETE /upload/5688a431c HTTP/1.1
   Host: example.com

   HTTP/1.1 204 No Content

4.6.  Concurrency

   Resumable uploads, as defined in this document, do not permit
   uploading representation data in parallel to the same upload
   resource.  The client MUST NOT perform multiple representation data
   transfers for the same upload resource in parallel.

   Even if the client is well-behaved and doesn't send concurrent
   requests, network interruptions can occur in such a way that the
   client considers a request as failed while the server is unaware of
   the problem and considers the request still ongoing.  The client
   might then try to resume the upload with the best intentions,
   resulting in concurrent requests from the server's perspective.
   Therefore, the server MUST take measures to prevent race conditions,
   data loss and corruption from concurrent requests to append
   representation data (Section 4.4) and/or cancellation (Section 4.5)
   to the same upload resource.  In addition, the server MUST NOT send
   outdated information in responses when retrieving the offset
   (Section 4.3).  This means that the offset sent by the server MUST be
   accepted in a subsequent request to append representation data if no
   other request to append representation data or cancel was received in
   the meantime.  In other words, clients have to be able to use
   received offsets.

   The RECOMMENDED approach is as follows: If an upload resource
   receives a new request to retrieve the offset (Section 4.3), append
   representation data (Section 4.4), or cancel the upload (Section 4.5)
   while a previous request for creating the upload (Section 4.2) or
   appending representation data (Section 4.4) is still ongoing, the
   resource SHOULD prevent race conditions, data loss, and corruption by
   terminating the previous request before processing the new request.
   Due to network delay and reordering, the resource might still be
   receiving representation data from an ongoing transfer for the same
   upload resource, which in the client's perspective has failed.  Since
   the client is not allowed to perform multiple transfers in parallel,
   the upload resource can assume that the previous attempt has already
   failed.  Therefore, the server MAY abruptly terminate the previous
   HTTP connection or stream.

   Since implementing this approach is not always technically possible
   or feasible, other measures can be considered as well.  A simpler
   approach is that the server only processes a new request to retrieve
   the offset (Section 4.3), append representation data (Section 4.4),
   or cancellation (Section 4.5) once all previous requests have been
   processed.  This effectively implements exclusive access to the
   upload resource through an access lock.  However, since network
   interruptions can occur in ways that cause the request to hang from
   the server's perspective, it might take the server significant time
   to realize the interruption and time out the request.  During this
   period, the client will be unable to access the resource and resume
   the upload, causing friction for the end users.  Therefore, the
   recommended approach is to terminate previous requests to enable
   quick resumption of uploads.

5.  Status Code 104 (Upload Resumption Supported)

   The 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status code is can be used for
   two purposes:

   *  When responding to requests to create uploads, an interim response
      with the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status code can be sent
      to indicate the server's support for resumable uploads, as well as
      the URI and limits of the corresponding upload resource in the
      Location and Upload-Limit header fields, respectively (see
      Section 4.2).  This notifies the client early about the ability to
      resume the upload in case of network interruptions.

   *  While processing the content of a request to append representation
      data or create an upload, the server can regularly send interim
      responses with the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status code
      to indicate the current upload progress in the Upload-Offset
      header field (see Section 4.2 and Section 4.4).  This allows the
      client to show more accurate progress information about the amount
      of data received by the server.  In addition, clients can use this
      information to release representation data that was buffered,
      knowing that it doesn't have to be re-transmitted.

   When creating or appending resumable uploads, the client can generate
   a 100-continue expectation because it wants an indication that the
   server is willing to accept the upload.  The client MAY treat an
   interim response with the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status
   code as fulfilling the 100-continue expectation and start sending the
   request content.  However, the server MUST NOT omit the 100
   (Continue) response because it has sent an interim response with the
   104 (Upload Resumption Supported) status code.

6.  Media Type application/partial-upload

   The application/partial-upload media type describes a contiguous
   block from the representation data that should be uploaded to a
   resource.  There is no minimum block size and the block might be
   empty.  The block can be a subset of the representation data, where
   the start and/or end of the block don't line up with the start and/or
   end of the representation data respectively.

7.  Problem Types

7.1.  Mismatching Offset

   This section defines the "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
   types#mismatching-upload-offset" problem type [PROBLEM].  A server
   can use this problem type when responding to an upload append request
   (Section 4.4) to indicate that the Upload-Offset header field in the
   request does not match the upload resource's offset.

   Two problem type extension members are defined: the expected-offset
   and provided-offset members.  A response using this problem type
   SHOULD populate both members, with the value of expected-offset taken
   from the upload resource and the value of provided-offset taken from
   the upload append request.

   The following example shows an example response, where the resource's
   offset was 12500000, but the client attempted to append at offset
   25000000:

   # NOTE: '\' line wrapping per RFC 8792

   HTTP/1.1 409 Conflict
   Content-Type: application/problem+json

   {
     "type":"https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#\
       mismatching-upload-offset",
     "title": "offset from request does not match offset of resource",
     "expected-offset": 12500000,
     "provided-offset": 25000000
   }

7.2.  Completed Upload

   This section defines the "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
   types#completed-upload" problem type [PROBLEM].  A server can use
   this problem type when responding to an upload append request
   (Section 4.4) to indicate that the upload has already been completed
   and cannot be modified.

   The following example shows an example response:

   # NOTE: '\' line wrapping per RFC 8792

   HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
   Content-Type: application/problem+json

   {
     "type":"https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#\
       completed-upload",
     "title": "upload is already completed"
   }

7.3.  Inconsistent Length

   This section defines the "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
   types#inconsistent-upload-length" problem type [PROBLEM].  A server
   can use this problem type when responding to an upload creation
   (Section 4.2) or upload append request (Section 4.4) to indicate that
   the request includes inconsistent upload length values, as described
   in Section 4.1.3.

   The following example shows an example response:

   # NOTE: '\' line wrapping per RFC 8792

   HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
   Content-Type: application/problem+json

   {
     "type":"https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#\
       inconsistent-upload-length",
     "title": "inconsistent length values for upload"
   }

8.  Content Codings

   Since the codings listed in Content-Encoding are a characteristic of
   the representation (see Section 8.4 of [HTTP]), both the client and
   the server always compute the values for Upload-Offset and optionally
   Upload-Length on the content coded data (that is, the representation
   data).  Moreover, the content codings are retained throughout the
   entire upload, meaning that the server is not required to decode the
   representation data to support resumable uploads.  See Appendix A of
   [DIGEST-FIELDS] for more information.

9.  Transfer Codings

   Unlike Content-Encoding (see Section 8.4.1 of [HTTP]), Transfer-
   Encoding (see Section 6.1 of [HTTP/1.1]) is a property of the
   message, not of the representation.  Moreover, transfer codings can
   be applied in transit (e.g., by proxies).  This means that a client
   does not have to consider the transfer codings to compute the upload
   offset, while a server is responsible for transfer decoding the
   message before computing the upload offset.  The same applies to the
   value of Upload-Length.  Please note that the Content-Length header
   field cannot be used in conjunction with the Transfer-Encoding header
   field.

10.  Integrity Digests

   The integrity of an entire upload or individual upload requests can
   be verifying using digests from [DIGEST-FIELDS].

10.1.  Representation Digests

   Representation digests help verify the integrity of the entire
   representation data that has been uploaded so far, which might
   stretch across multiple requests.

   If the client knows the integrity digest of the entire representation
   data before creating an upload resource, it can include the Repr-
   Digest header field when creating an upload (Section 4.2).  Once the
   upload is completed, the server can compute the integrity digest of
   the received representation data and compare it to the provided
   digest.  If the digests don't match, the server SHOULD consider the
   upload failed, not process the representation further, and signal the
   failure to the client.  This way, the integrity of the entire
   representation data can be protected.

   Alternatively, when creating an upload (Section 4.2), the client can
   ask the server to compute and return the integrity digests using a
   Want-Repr-Digest field conveying the preferred algorithms.  The
   response SHOULD include at least one of the requested digests, but
   might not include it.  The server SHOULD compute the representation
   digests using the preferred algorithms once the upload is complete
   and include the corresponding Repr-Digest header field in the
   response.  Alternatively, the server can compute the digest
   continuously during the upload and include the Repr-Digest header
   field in responses to upload creation (Section 4.2) and upload
   appending requests (Section 4.4) even when the upload is not
   completed yet.  This allows the client to simultaneously compute the
   digest of the transmitted representation data, compare its digest to
   the server's digest, and spot data integrity issues.  If an upload is
   spread across multiple requests, data integrity issues can be found
   even before the upload is fully completed.

10.2.  Content Digests

   Content digests help verify the integrity of the content in an
   individual request.

   If the client knows the integrity digest of the content from an
   upload creation (Section 4.2) or upload appending (Section 4.4)
   request, it can include the Content-Digest header field in the
   request.  Once the content has been received, the server can compute
   the integrity digest of the received content and compare it to the
   provided digest.  If the digests don't match the server SHOULD
   consider the transfer failed, not append the content to the upload
   resource, and signal the failure to the client.  This way, the
   integrity of an individual request can be protected.

11.  Responses to Uploads

   HTTP uploads often not only transfer a representation to the server
   but also send back information to the client.  For resumable uploads,
   this works similarly to conventional HTTP uploads.  The server can
   include information in the response to the request that transferred
   the remaining representation data and included the Upload-Complete:
   ?1 header field.  Clients can regard this response as the final
   response for the entire upload, as detailed in Section 4.2 and
   Section 4.4.

   However, due to network interruptions, the upload resource might
   receive the remaining representation data, complete the upload, and
   send a response to the client, which then does not receive the
   response.  The client can learn that the upload is complete by
   retrieving its state (Section 4.3), but resumable uploads as defined
   in this document do not offer functionality to recover the missed
   response.

   To address this issue, the server can send the desired information in
   header fields, which are included in both the final response and
   responses when the client fetches the upload state via a HEAD request
   (Section 4.3).  This way, the client can retrieve the information
   from the header even if it failed to receive the final response.  If
   the piece of information is too large for header fields, the server
   could make it available as a separate resource for retrieval and
   point the client to its URI in an appropriate header field.

12.  Upload Strategies

   The definition of the upload creation request (Section 4.2) provides
   the client with flexibility to choose whether the representation data
   is fully or partially transferred in the first request, or if no
   representation data is included at all.  Which behavior is best
   largely depends on the client's capabilities, its intention to avoid
   data re-transmission, and its knowledge about the server's support
   for resumable uploads.

   The following subsections describe two typical upload strategies that
   are suited for common environments.  Note that these modes are never
   explicitly communicated to the server and clients are not required to
   stick to one strategy, but can mix and adapt them to their needs.

12.1.  Optimistic Upload Creation

   An "optimistic upload creation" can be used independent of the
   client's knowledge about the server's support for resumable uploads.
   However, the client must be capable of handling and processing
   interim responses.  An upload creation request then includes the full
   representation data because the client anticipates that it will be
   transferred without interruptions or resumed if an interruption
   occurs.

   The benefit of this method is that if the upload creation request
   succeeded, the representation data was transferred in a single
   request without additional round trips.

   A possible drawback is that the client might be unable to resume an
   upload.  If an upload is interrupted before the client receives a 104
   (Upload Resumption Supported) interim response with the upload
   resource's URI, the client cannot resume that upload due to the
   missing URI.  The interim response might not be received if the
   interruption happens too early in the message exchange, the server
   does not support resumable uploads at all, the server does not
   support sending the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) interim
   response, or an intermediary dropped the interim response.  Without a
   104 response, the client needs to either treat the upload as failed
   or retry the entire upload creation request if this is allowed by the
   application.

   A client might wait for a limited duration to receive a 104 (Upload
   Resumption Supported) interim response before starting to transmit
   the request content.  This way, the client can learn about the
   resource's support for resumable uploads and/or the upload resource's
   URI.  This is conceptually similar to how a client might wait for a
   100 (Continue) interim response (see Section 10.1.1 of [HTTP]) before
   committing to work.

12.1.1.  Upgrading To Resumable Uploads

   Optimistic upload creation allows clients and servers to
   automatically upgrade non-resumable uploads to resumable ones.  In a
   non-resumable upload, the representation is transferred in a single
   request, usually POST or PUT, without any ability to resume from
   interruptions.  The client can invite the server to upgrade such a
   request to a resumable upload by adding the Upload-Complete: ?1
   header field to the original request.  The Upload-Length header field
   SHOULD be added if the representation data's length is known upfront.
   The request is not changed otherwise.

   A server that supports resumable uploads at the target URI can create
   an upload resource and send its URI in a 104 (Upload Resumption
   Supported) interim response for the client to resume the upload after
   interruptions.  A server that does not support resumable uploads or
   does not want to upgrade to a resumable upload for this request
   ignores the Upload-Complete: ?1 header.  The transfer then falls back
   to a non-resumable upload without additional cost.

   This upgrade can also be performed transparently by a library or
   program that acts as a HTTP client by sending requests on behalf of a
   user.  When the user instructs the client to send a non-resumable
   request, the client can perform the upgrade transparently and handle
   potential interruptions and resumptions under the hood without
   involving the user.  The last response received by the client is
   considered the response for the entire upload and should be provided
   to the user.

12.2.  Careful Upload Creation

   For a "careful upload creation" the client knows that the server
   supports resumable uploads and sends an empty upload creation request
   without including any representation data.  Upon successful response
   reception, the client can use the included upload resource URI to
   transmit the representation data (Section 4.4) and resume the upload
   at any stage if an interruption occurs.  The client should inspect
   the response for the Upload-Limit header field, which would indicate
   limits applying to the remaining upload procedure.

   The retransmission of representation data or the ultimate upload
   failure that can happen with an "optimistic upload creation" is
   therefore avoided at the expense of an additional request that does
   not carry representation data.

   This approach is best suited if the client cannot receive interim
   responses, e.g. due to a limitation in the provided HTTP interface,
   or if large representations are transferred where the cost of the
   additional request is minuscule compared to the effort of
   transferring the representation itself.

13.  Security Considerations

   The upload resource URI is the identifier used for modifying the
   upload.  Without further protection of this URI, an attacker may
   obtain information about an upload, append data to it, or cancel it.
   To prevent this, the server SHOULD ensure that only authorized
   clients can access the upload resource.  To reduce the risk of
   unauthorized access, it is RECOMMENDED to generate upload resource
   URIs in such a way that makes it hard to be guessed by unauthorized
   clients.  In addition, servers may embed information about the
   storage or processing location of the uploaded representation in the
   upload resource URI to make routing requests more efficient.  If so,
   they MUST ensure that no internal information is leaked in the URI
   that is not intended to be exposed.

   Uploaded representation data and its metadata are untrusted input.
   Server operators have to be careful of where uploaded data is written
   and subsequently accessed, especially if the operations cause the
   representation to be processed or executed by the server.  In
   addition, metadata MUST be validated and/or sanitized if the server
   takes its values into consideration for processing or storing the
   representation.

   Some servers or intermediaries provide scanning of content uploaded
   by clients.  Any scanning mechanism that relies on receiving a
   complete representation in a single request message can be defeated
   by resumable uploads because content can be split across multiple
   messages.  Servers or intermediaries wishing to perform content
   scanning SHOULD consider how resumable uploads can circumvent
   scanning and take appropriate measures.  Possible strategies include
   waiting for the upload to complete before scanning the entire
   representation, or disabling resumable uploads.

   There can be a significant delay between the creation of an upload
   resource and its completion.  Policy decisions or authorization
   checks performed on the initial request might become outdated or
   invalid by the time the upload completes.  To mitigate
   vulnerabilities arising from time-of-check to time-of-use (TOCTOU)
   conditions, the server SHOULD validate that the user is still allowed
   to perform the requested action before finalizing the upload.  This
   includes, for example, validating access privileges and quota
   policies associated with the upload resource.

   Resumable uploads are vulnerable to Slowloris-style attacks
   [SLOWLORIS].  A malicious client may create upload resources and keep
   them alive by regularly sending PATCH requests with no or small
   content to the upload resources.  This could be abused to exhaust
   server resources by creating and holding open uploads indefinitely
   with minimal work.  Servers SHOULD provide mitigations for Slowloris
   attacks, such as increasing the maximum number of clients the server
   will allow, limiting the number of uploads a single client is allowed
   to make, imposing restrictions on the minimum transfer speed an
   upload is allowed to have, and restricting the length of time an
   upload resource can exist.

   Uploads performed as a series of appends can be used to upload data
   up to the max-size limit, which could be a larger size than a server
   or intermediary might normally permit in conventional single upload
   request message content.  Servers or intermediaries need to consider
   that relying solely on message content limits to constrain resources
   allocated to uploads might not be an effective strategy when using
   resumable uploads.

14.  IANA Considerations

14.1.  HTTP Fields

   IANA is asked to register the following entries in the "Hypertext
   Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Field Name Registry":

   +=================+===========+=================+==================+
   | Field Name      | Status    | Structured Type | Reference        |
   +=================+===========+=================+==================+
   | Upload-Offset   | permanent | Item            | Section 4.1.1 of |
   |                 |           |                 | this document    |
   +-----------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+
   | Upload-Complete | permanent | Item            | Section 4.1.2 of |
   |                 |           |                 | this document    |
   +-----------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+
   | Upload-Length   | permanent | Item            | Section 4.1.3 of |
   |                 |           |                 | this document    |
   +-----------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+
   | Upload-Limit    | permanent | Dictionary      | Section 4.1.4 of |
   |                 |           |                 | this document    |
   +-----------------+-----------+-----------------+------------------+

                                 Table 1

14.2.  HTTP Status Code

   IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "HTTP Status
   Codes" registry:

   Value:  104 (suggested value)

   Description:  Upload Resumption Supported

   Specification:  Section 5 of this document

14.3.  Media Type

   IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "Media Types"
   registry:

   Type name:  application

   Subtype name:  partial-upload

   Required parameters:  N/A

   Optional parameters:  N/A

   Encoding considerations:  binary

   Security considerations:  see Section 13 of this document

   Interoperability considerations:  N/A

   Published specification:  Section 6 of this document

   Applications that use this media type:  Applications that transfer
      files over unreliable networks or want pause- and resumable
      uploads.

   Fragment identifier considerations:  N/A

   Additional information:

   *  Deprecated alias names for this type: N/A

   *  Magic number(s): N/A

   *  File extension(s): N/A

   *  Macintosh file type code(s): N/A

   *  Windows Clipboard Name: N/A

   Person and email address to contact for further information:  See the
      Authors' Addresses section of this document.

   Intended usage:  COMMON

   Restrictions on usage:  N/A

   Author:  See the Authors' Addresses section of this document.

   Change controller:  IETF

14.4.  HTTP Problem Types

   IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "HTTP Problem
   Types" registry:

   Type URI:  https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
      types#mismatching-upload-offset

   Title:  Mismatching Upload Offset

   Recommended HTTP status code:  409

   Reference:  Section 7.1 of this document

   IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "HTTP Problem
   Types" registry:

   Type URI:  https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#completed-
      upload

   Title:  Upload Is Completed

   Recommended HTTP status code:  400

   Reference:  Section 7.2 of this document

   IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "HTTP Problem
   Types" registry:

   Type URI:  https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-
      types#inconsistent-upload-length

   Title:  Inconsistent Upload Length Values

   Recommended HTTP status code:  400

   Reference:  Section 7.3 of this document

15.  References

15.1.  Normative References

   [CACHING]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Caching", STD 98, RFC 9111,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9111, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9111>.

   [CONTENT-DISPOSITION]
              Reschke, J., "Use of the Content-Disposition Header Field
              in the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)", RFC 6266,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6266, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6266>.

   [DIGEST-FIELDS]
              Polli, R. and L. Pardue, "Digest Fields", RFC 9530,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9530, February 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9530>.

   [HTTP]     Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110>.

   [HTTP/1.1] Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP/1.1", STD 99, RFC 9112, DOI 10.17487/RFC9112,
              June 2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9112>.

   [PATCH]    Dusseault, L. and J. Snell, "PATCH Method for HTTP",
              RFC 5789, DOI 10.17487/RFC5789, March 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789>.

   [PROBLEM]  Nottingham, M., Wilde, E., and S. Dalal, "Problem Details
              for HTTP APIs", RFC 9457, DOI 10.17487/RFC9457, July 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9457>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [STRUCTURED-FIELDS]
              Nottingham, M. and P. Kamp, "Structured Field Values for
              HTTP", RFC 9651, DOI 10.17487/RFC9651, September 2024,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9651>.

15.2.  Informative References

   [RFC8792]  Watsen, K., Auerswald, E., Farrel, A., and Q. Wu,
              "Handling Long Lines in Content of Internet-Drafts and
              RFCs", RFC 8792, DOI 10.17487/RFC8792, June 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8792>.

   [SLOWLORIS]
              "RSnake" Hansen, R., "Welcome to Slowloris - the low
              bandwidth, yet greedy and poisonous HTTP client!", June
              2009, <https://web.archive.org/web/20150315054838/
              http://ha.ckers.org/slowloris/>.

Appendix A.  Changes

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-10

   None yet.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-09

   *  Requires Accept-Patch in OPTIONS.

   *  Add security consideration regarding time-of-check to time-of-use.

   *  Lift requirement on Upload-Complete for all final responses.

   *  Relax requirements on limit changes.

   *  Describe the interaction between 100 and 104 responses.

   *  Numerous editorial improvements.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-08

   *  Clarify definitions of new header fields.

   *  Make handling of OPTIONS * optional.

   *  Require server to announce limits using Upload-Limit.

   *  Require clients to adhere to known limits.

   *  Rephrase requirements for concurrency handling, focusing on the
      outcome.

   *  Remove requirement for 204 status code for DELETE responses.

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

   *  Add section about 104 status code.

   *  Rephrase recommendation for sending information back to client.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-07

   *  Clarify server handling when upload length is exceeded.

   *  Extend security considerations about upload resource URIs,
      representation metadata, and untrusted inputs.

   *  Allow clients to retry for appropriate 4xx responses.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-06

   *  Minor editorial improvements to introduction and examples.

   *  Define structured types for new header fields.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-05

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

   *  Numerous editorial changes.

   *  Rename expires limit to max-age.

   *  Require Upload-Complete, but not Upload-Offset or Upload-Limit,
      for append responses.

   *  Add problem type for inconsistent length values.

   *  Reduce use of "file" in favor of "representation".

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-04

   *  Clarify implications of Upload-Limit header.

   *  Allow client to fetch upload limits upfront via OPTIONS.

   *  Add guidance on upload creation strategy.

   *  Add Upload-Length header to indicate length during creation.

   *  Describe possible usage of Want-Repr-Digest.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-03

   *  Add note about Content-Location for referring to subsequent
      resources.

   *  Require application/partial-upload for appending to uploads.

   *  Explain handling of content and transfer codings.

   *  Add problem types for mismatching offsets and completed uploads.

   *  Clarify that completed uploads must not be appended to.

   *  Describe interaction with Digest Fields from RFC9530.

   *  Require that upload offset does not decrease over time.

   *  Add Upload-Limit header field.

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-02

   *  Add upload progress notifications via informational responses.

   *  Add security consideration regarding request filtering.

   *  Explain the use of empty requests for creation uploads and
      appending.

   *  Extend security consideration to include resource exhaustion
      attacks.

   *  Allow 200 status codes for offset retrieval.

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-01

   *  Replace Upload-Incomplete header with Upload-Complete.

   *  Replace terminology about procedures with HTTP resources.

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

Since draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload-00

   *  Remove Upload-Token and instead use Server-generated upload URL
      for upload identification.

   *  Require the Upload-Incomplete header field in Upload Creation
      Procedure.

   *  Increase the draft interop version.

Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-02

   None

Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-01

   *  Clarifying backtracking and preventing skipping ahead during the
      Offset Receiving Procedure.

   *  Clients auto-retry 404 is no longer allowed.

Since draft-tus-httpbis-resumable-uploads-protocol-00

   *  Split the Upload Transfer Procedure into the Upload Creation
      Procedure and the Upload Appending Procedure.

Appendix B.  Draft Version Identification

   This section is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   To assist the development of implementations and interoperability
   testing while this document is still a draft, an interop version is
   defined.  Implementations of this draft use the interop version to
   identify the iteration of the draft that they implement.  The interop
   version is bumped for breaking changes.

   The current interop version is 8.

   Client implementations of draft versions of the protocol MUST send a
   header field Upload-Draft-Interop-Version with the interop version as
   its value to its requests.  The Upload-Draft-Interop-Version field
   value is an Integer.

   Server implementations of draft versions of the protocol MUST NOT
   send a 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) informational response when
   the interop version indicated by the Upload-Draft-Interop-Version
   header field in the request is missing or mismatching.

   Server implementations of draft versions of the protocol MUST also
   send a header field Upload-Draft-Interop-Version with the interop
   version as its value to the 104 (Upload Resumption Supported)
   informational response.

   Client implementations of draft versions of the protocol MUST ignore
   a 104 (Upload Resumption Supported) informational response with
   missing or mismatching interop version indicated by the Upload-Draft-
   Interop-Version header field.

   The reason both the client and the server are sending and checking
   the draft version is to ensure that implementations of the final RFC
   will not accidentally interop with draft implementations, as they
   will not check the existence of the Upload-Draft-Interop-Version
   header field.

Acknowledgments

   This document is based on an Internet-Draft specification written by
   Jiten Mehta, Stefan Matsson, and the authors of this document.

   The tus v1 protocol (https://tus.io/) is a specification for a
   resumable file upload protocol over HTTP.  It inspired the early
   design of this protocol.  Members of the tus community helped
   significantly in the process of bringing this work to the IETF.

   The authors would like to thank Mark Nottingham for substantive
   contributions to the text, along with the following in alphabetical
   order for their thorough reviews of the document:

   *  Mike Bishop

   *  Roy T.  Fielding

   *  Julian Reschke

   *  Glenn Strauss

   *  Willy Tarreau

Authors' Addresses

   Marius Kleidl (editor)
   Transloadit
   Email: marius@transloadit.com


   Guoye Zhang (editor)
   Apple Inc.
   Email: guoye_zhang@apple.com


   Lucas Pardue (editor)
   Cloudflare
   Email: lucas@lucaspardue.com
